Replace ALWAYS_PARENT with a composite ParentOrElse sampler (#609)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/sdk.md

### Built-in samplers

#### AlwaysOn

> * This will be used as a default.

Reviewer: nit: spec should not use future tense
```suggestion
* This will the default sampler.
```

* Returns `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED` always.
* Description MUST be `AlwaysOnSampler`.

#### AlwaysOff

* Returns `NOT_RECORD` always.
* Description MUST be `AlwaysOffSampler`.

#### Probability

> * The default behavior should be to trust the parent `SampledFlag`. However

Reviewer: Should this have the "always" behavior instead of trusting parent, to be consistent? If trusting parent is needed, use `Sampers.parentOrElse(Samplers.probabilistic(r))`.

Reviewer: I see you have added TODO, so will be in the separate PR?

Author: Yes.

  there should be configuration to change this.
* The default behavior is to apply the sampling probability only for Spans
  that are root spans (no parent) and Spans with remote parent. However there
  should be configuration to change this to "root spans only", or "all spans".
* Description MUST be `ProbabilitySampler{0.000100}`.

TODO: Add details about how the probability sampler is implemented as a function
of the `TraceID`.
TODO: Split out the parent handling.

#### ParentOrElse

> * This is a composite sampler. `ParentOrElse(delegateSampler)` delegates to  `delegateSampler` for root spans and otherwise respects the parent sampling decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* This is a composite sampler. `ParentOrElse(delegateSampler)` either respects the parent span's sampling decision or delegates to  `delegateSampler` for root spans.
```

Author: Done.

### Built-in samplers

#### AlwaysOn

* This will be used as a default.
* Returns `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED` always.
* Description MUST be `AlwaysOnSampler`.

#### AlwaysOff

* Returns `NOT_RECORD` always.
* Description MUST be `AlwaysOffSampler`.

#### Probability

* The default behavior should be to trust the parent `SampledFlag`. However
  there should be configuration to change this.
* The default behavior is to apply the sampling probability only for Spans
  that are root spans (no parent) and Spans with remote parent. However there
  should be configuration to change this to "root spans only", or "all spans".
* Description MUST be `ProbabilitySampler{0.000100}`.

> TODO: Add details about how the probability sampler is implemented as a function

Reviewer 2: Add a TODO here to split out the parent handling, or do it in this PR.

Author: Done.

of the `TraceID`.

> #### RootOnly

Reviewer 2: That name is odd. It applies the sampler only to roots, but it does not sample out all non-roots. I suggest `FollowParentOr` (HonorParent? AcceptParent? YieldToParent?) or as @yurishkuro suggested `ParentOrElse`.

Reviewer 2: Can be resolved (unless you like one of my other suggestions more).

Author: Used @yurishkuro's suggestion.

> * Is a composite sampler `RootOnly(delegateSampler)` which ensures that the `delegateSampler` is called only for root spans.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* This is a composite sampler. `RootOnly(delegateSampler)` delegates to `delegateSampler` for root spans and otherwise respects the parent sampling decision.
```

Reviewer 2: Or just "Composite sampler: ..."

* If there is a parent:
  * If parent's `SampledFlag` is set to `true` returns `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED`
  * If parent's `SampledFlag` is set to `false` returns `NOT_RECORD`

> * If no parent (root span) returns the result of the `delegateSampler`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If no parent exists (root span) returns the result of the `delegateSampler`.
```

* Description MUST be `RootOnly{delegateSampler.getDescription()}`.

> |Parent's `SampledFlag`|`RootOnly(delegateSampler)`

Reviewer 2: I think this is simple enough that the table has no much added value IMHO, but I have a slight personal dislike for tables, so no strong opinion 😃

Author: I like that it summarize things for lazy people like me :)

* ALWAYS_ON
  * This will be used as a default.
  * Returns `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED` always.
  * Description MUST be `AlwaysOnSampler`.
* ALWAYS_OFF
  * Returns `NOT_RECORD` always.
  * Description MUST be `AlwaysOffSampler`.

> * ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_ON

Reviewer: I am not sure this denormalization is very useful. First, it can be achieved with a composite sampler `RespectParentOrElse(anotherSampler)`, which would cover both On/Off/Probabilistic as fallbacks.

But second, is the sampler even called when the parent is present? Does it mean it's called every time for every span?

Reviewer 2: Yes, absolutely*. That's why we have an IsRemote property on the SpanContext, and the parent SpanContext is passed to the sampler.

Reviewer: fair enough, but the first reason still stands.

Author: I like the respect ParentOrElse pattern. I will change this PR to propose that pattern.

Author: From SDK perspective I think we should always call, but using composite samplers like `RespectParentOrElse` we can control better when a real sampler is called vs we just return parent's decision.

Reviewer 2: I think the ALWAYS_PARENT pattern is still common enough to warrant it's own sampler. We should take care not to fall into the [inner-platform](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inner-platform_effect) trap here. After all, if I can write something like this today (using Java 8 functional interfaces, pseudo-code): `setSampler((parent, attrs) -> new Decision(!parent.isValid() || parent.getTraceFlags().isSampled()))`. This could be written as `setSampler(Samplers.alwaysParentOrOff()` or `setSampler(samplers.respectParentOrElse(samplers.staticDecision(true)))`. I think we should try to keep it simple here.

Author: The proposed solution is:
`setSampler(Samplers.rootOnly(Samplers.alwaysOn()))`

Reviewer: `rootOnly` seems overly definitive (the "only" part), `parentOrElse` is more explicit/obvious.

`setSampler(Samplers.parentOrElse(Samplers.alwaysOn()))`

Author: @Oberon00 using java8 lambdas is a language specific tool. I feel that the specification should not be specific to java8 lambdas usage. Also having this defined by the specs allows us to configure this remotely.

Author: Closing this as I think it was addressed by https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/609#issuecomment-630367896 and https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/609#discussion_r426833100

>   * Returns `NOT_RECORD` if parent's `SampledFlag` is set to `false`, otherwise `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Returns `NOT_RECORD` if there is a parent and its `SampledFlag` is set to `false`, otherwise `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED`.
```

>   * Description MUST be `AlwaysParentOrOnSampler`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Description MUST be `AlwaysParentOrOnSampler`.
  * SDKs MAY implement the `AlwaysParentOrOnSampler` using a `ProbabilitySampler{1}` (see below).
```

Author: This is not correct based on the current definition of Probability (or at least what I understand from that). I would do it in a separate PR because it feels that there are some misunderstandings about Probability sampler.

Author: `ProbabilitySampler{1}` is equivalent with `Always_On`

Reviewer 3: The spec says:
> Probability: The default behavior should be to trust the parent `SampledFlag`. However there should be configuration to change this.

I would interpret "to trust" as in, to take over or inherit the sampled flag just as the AlwaysParentOrXSamplers do. However, as we can see, this is quite vague and certainly needs to be clarified in this or a follow-up PR.

Author: As I said that is a separate concern and will update later as well as equivalence between constant samplers and probability.

* ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_OFF

>   * Returns `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED` if parent's `SampledFlag` is set to `true`, otherwise and `NOT_RECORD`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Returns `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED` if there is a parent and its `SampledFlag` is set to `true`, otherwise `NOT_RECORD`.
```

(note also the typo "otherwise and").

> * ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_ON
>   * Returns `NOT_RECORD` if there is a parent and its `SampledFlag` is set to `false`, otherwise `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED`.
>   * Description MUST be `AlwaysParentOrOnSampler`.
> * ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_OFF
>   * Returns `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED` if there is a parent and its `SampledFlag` is set to `true`, otherwise `NOT_RECORD`.
>   * Description MUST be `AlwaysParentOrOffSampler`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_ON
  * Returns `NOT_RECORD` if there is a parent and its `SampledFlag` is set to `false`, otherwise `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED`.
  * Description MUST be `AlwaysParentOrOnSampler`.
  * SDKs MAY implement the `AlwaysParentOrOnSampler` using a `ProbabilitySampler{1}` (see below).
* ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_OFF
  * Returns `RECORD_AND_SAMPLED` if there is a parent and its `SampledFlag` is set to `true`, otherwise `NOT_RECORD`.
  * Description MUST be `AlwaysParentOrOffSampler`.
  * SDKs MAY implement the `AlwaysParentOrOffSampler` using a `ProbabilitySampler{0}` (see below).
```

>   * Description MUST be `AlwaysParentOrOffSampler`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Description MUST be `AlwaysParentOrOffSampler`.
  * SDKs MAY implement the `AlwaysParentOrOffSampler` using a `ProbabilitySampler{0}` (see below).
```

  should be configuration to change this to "root spans only", or "all spans".
  * Description MUST be `ProbabilitySampler{0.000100}`.

> 
> |Parent's `SampledFlag`|`ALWAYS_ON`|`ALWAYS_OFF`|`ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_ON`|`ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_OFF`|

Reviewer 2: Add sentence introducing the table:

```suggestion

The following table summarizes the behavior of the built-in samplers depending on the parent's presence and sampled flag:

|Parent's `SampledFlag`|`ALWAYS_ON`|`ALWAYS_OFF`|`ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_ON`|`ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_OFF`|
```

|--|--|--|--|--|

> |`true`                         |`RECORD_AND_SAMPLED`|`NOT_RECORD`|`RECORD_AND_SAMPLED`|`RECORD_AND_SAMPLED`|

Reviewer 2: I suggest also adding a column for `Probability{x}`. The cells would have the same value as for ALWAYS_PARENT_OR_* except for the no parent row, where I would put

> RECORD_AND_SAMPLED with probability `x`, otherwise NOT_RECORD.

  should be configuration to change this to "root spans only", or "all spans".

>   * Description MUST be `ProbabilitySampler{0.000100}`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Description MUST be `ProbabilitySampler{p}`, where `p` is the selected probability, e.g., `ProbabilitySampler{0.000100}`.
```
Unrelated to this PR but a quick fix to make it entirely clear :-)
